Good morning.
Do you want any water or anything? You go? You all right?
Do you need any water? Yeah,
Probably. I will grab a water. I'll
Okay.
Yes, please.
Water.
That's A bit more than that other one.
No, it's, we're getting some more,
right?
Um, sure. I'll hand it over to you. Yep.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, in a memo, dear.
Good morning. Uh, it is good, uh, to be back.
Talk to about our long-term insights briefly.
Just a few quick introductions.
Many of you will know my colleagues Carl Rafer,
has been here many occasions.
Chief Operating Officer Victoria Davey, who's the EC
strategy, which is where we did our work out of that group.
And just make a couple of introductions for him. Uh, Dr.
Kelvin Watson, uh, who's our ec, uh, corporate, uh,
and be parish, who also will have had conversations
with previously our numbers guru.
Uh, so this will be our second.
And, uh, obviously last L tib as required by law.
Uh, we use this, uh, to take the opportunity to take stock
and look forward at the justice system.
It's an important part of how we bring a stewardship focus,
a sense of what the future, uh,
might hold, uh, at its heart.
What people want from the justice system is not complicated.
They want fair outcomes.
They want them delivered in a timely way
through a system they can understand
and trust without the process coming more burdensome
than the problem itself.
They wanna be heard, they wanna be treated with dignity,
and they want confidence.
The system will work for them when they need it to.
Uh, those expectations are not new.
Uh, they've not changed what has changed.
Funded interview the environment in which the justice system
now operates long term insights.
Briefing we are discussing today paints a
clear picture of where we are.
Describes system under sustained pressure from growing
demand, rising costs, increasing complexity
and workforce constraints.
Demand for courts
and justice services has been rising steadily in quite
complex ways for decades.
And in a demand driven system,
pressure accumulates rather than ease.
At the same time, access to justice remains uneven cost,
travel complexity,
and the difficulty of navigating
processes continue to be real.
Barriers for many people.
Uh, consultation, uh,
over the LT tip confirmed what we already know.
While the system works well for many people in New Zealand,
that does not work equally well for all.
And that matters for trust and for legitimacy.
Uh, overlaying all of this, our long term social
and demographic trends,
new Zealanders becoming more diverse.
Uh, more urban and older.
Expectations of public services are changing.
Trust in institutions is under pressure,
and the justice system is not insulated from those shifts.
Uh, the core message, uh, is simple.
Today's system will not stretch to meet tomorrow's demands.
It's not a criticism.
It's the context for the sort, the system
that we function in at the moment.
This briefing is very deliberate in
how it treats technology.
It does not present it as a silver bullet,
but it does make one thing clear.
Technology dramatically expands the set
of choices available to US.
Digital tools, remote participation, automation,
artificial intelligence, or create opportunities to rethink
how justice services are delivered, how people engage
with the system, how work is organized,
and how scarce capability is deployed.
Used well, technology can reduce, delay, lower cost,
and improve accessibility used poorly
or used passively at risks, entrenching inequity
and undermining trust.
Long-term insights.
Briefing is clear that this is not about incremental
improvement at the margin.
Uh, it surfaces genuine choices.
Just very briefly before I close these remarks,
those choices include whether we continue
to optimize a model that is increasingly strained,
or do we actively redesign the system around accessibility,
resilience, and trust, using AKA
or our digital case management system
to give us more choices for
how justice services are designed and delivered over time.
We set out six strategic choices in the briefing,
unmet legal need, uh, structural reform, user support,
technology, remote participation, uh,
and workforce capability.
They're not abstract questions.
Uh, they represent, I think
for us all a strategic inflection
point for the justice system.
Moments where decisions taken now will shape outcomes
for decades and where in action is itself a choice.
Which brings me to my final point.
Uh, and that's, this briefing,
I think sets out quite a compelling case
that actually we're at a genuinely consequential moment
in the history of the courts
and tribunals decisions taken were deferred over the next
decade will shape the justice system
for multiple generations.
The document does not tell us what to do.
It's not its role, it's value for us,
and hopefully for the system lies in making the choices
visible and in challenging us as leaders
and stewards of the system to engage
with those choices deliberately, rather than by default.
The future of justice in our country is not predetermined.
It'll be shaped by the decisions we make now about access,
accessibility, technology, workforce, and trust.
Uh, that's the invitation
of this long-term insights briefing.
Uh, it's one that we are finding a useful context
for our work, and we hope the committee will as well.
Okay. I'm going to go to Dr. And then I'll go.
Dr. We thank you so much, chair.
Thank you so much for coming. Uh, that was a great,
um, intro.
Just to sort of set the context of what we're dealing with.
The, uh, I got two questions.
The first one you mentioned, reca. Mm-hmm.
Um, how far are we,
because there's been some delays as we, you know,
in terms when we discussed this had, uh, scrutiny last year.
And I guess my second question is, you mentioned in terms
of the rising demand, as we know, both in terms of what
the chief, uh,
Supreme Court judge has also mentioned in their latest
report, is that our court system in terms of funding
that includes the number of judges, has not met
with the increase in population
and the changes to the demographics of our population.
So just wanna check you,
you on the thoughts on those two things first.
Okay. First one, uh, on, uh, Teka, the digital case, uh,
management system, uh, the, uh, uh, it's going very well in,
uh, in most respects.
Uh, it's, uh, but we're
doing a lot of testing at the moment.
We're testing it both with our staff, with the judiciary,
and with, uh, users in the profession.
That testing is all coming back with, uh, uh, with a,
a really quite resounding, um, uh, sense of, uh, positivity
and optimism about the system.
I think the technology is gonna be, uh, very, very sound.
Uh, we are in the process of identifying what our,
the beginning of our rollout date, uh, will be.
The beginning of the process we forecast.
That would be around the middle of this year.
Uh, it will, it, it will be a bit later than the middle
of this year, but we've, we are working out
exactly when that will be at the moment.
And over the, uh, next couple of months, we'll, we'll,
we'll have confirmed that.
'cause we need to know, uh, you know, about, um, uh,
six months out for scheduling purposes, uh, in the court.
So it's still in the same broad window,
but it there, there'll certainly be a few months, uh,
given the, in the timeframe when we begin implementation.
Some of that we may be able to, uh, pick up as we go
through the different phases of the
implement implementation.
So that was the, uh, question.
The other one is really about the, whether the amount
of judicial resourcing, uh, keeps pace with the system
and what I might flag.
And that is the way we, uh, approach that, that issue, uh,
so that, uh, we do quite a lot of modeling of
what is is needed in the system to, to get things through.
We identify the total number of, uh, judicial resources, uh,
that are, uh, that are required.
Um, uh, and,
and that takes into account both
what we think the inflows are gonna be, uh, the complexity
of the cases 'cause that has been shifting and, uh,
and changing and the overall, um, effectiveness and,
and, um, the, the kind of throughput, I guess,
of the, uh, of the court.
So when you take all of that together, uh,
what the numbers tell us is we're, we are up at the,
at the thresholds,
but we actually, you know, we've,
we have just put an increase, uh, through in the, uh, with,
uh, I think there was one more, uh,
judge in the district court.
And then there are, um, there was a three, I think with a,
with a, with a, the ability to be bit more flexible
around the edges in, in the courts.
That's, yeah, that's based on the modeling that we have.
So, uh, I think we're on a system that's close to capacity,
but we, you know, there are sufficient judicial places in it
at the moment to, uh, uh,
according to the modeling that we do.
Okay. Um, honorable Doctor
Doug. Thanks. I
found this, um, really, um, interesting.
Just actually really put, well put together.
Um, at the outset, you sort of have a section of what the
thoughts for, you know, what I found useful as well.
Um, Andrew Little, when he was minister at a public meeting,
essentially said, courts for people
who can't sort their stuff out Yeah.
Um, in one way or another, that's it, right?
But you've got some kind of conflict
or tension, whether it's state and citizen
or citizen and citizen.
Mm-hmm. Um, and then as I read through your briefing, uh,
I came to the little bit where you've got your hierarchy
of courts diagram, this familiar to law student,
and then you sort of made an interesting comment.
And you see below this sits, um,
other dispute resolution techniques, right.
Not alongside, uh, not even above it,
but I guess that's my question.
If we've got a framework which is clearly, uh,
trending to be at over capacity, um,
how do we not simply focus on moving
people through it faster or more efficiently,
but not entering it at all?
And I guess one of my,
and not just through this kind of a DR,
but also, um, working so that it doesn't get
to the position that people can't sort their stuff out.
Because I think,
and there's, there's a lot sort of a, a lecture as well
as a question, but we, we sometimes look at justice
as picking up the pieces, um, whereas in,
in other agencies as trying to get people
to not end up in justice.
And so my question is actually a cross-agency question.
Yeah. How do we work not just in the justice cluster,
which is when things have gone wrong,
but in the wider public service and community to try
and take the load off so
that people can sort their own. Okay,
Cool. We got that.
Yeah, it is a good,
Yeah, no, it's great question.
I personally was involved in helping change
with the laws, but yeah,
So that, that is, that is a, a, a,
a complex, uh, set of issues.
I might, I I'll acknowledge the, the point first.
The goal can't simply be to turn the wheel faster
and churn people through.
It should be, are the right things
coming into the court system?
And are there other ways of preventing
that within the justice system
and closely related to the justice system?
Some of the answers to that question, uh, you, you,
you steered me away from alternative dispute resolution,
but, but there will be ways of technology supporting, uh,
people to resolve their issues in that, in that space.
You know, the chief justice has been very clear
that the courts will always remain a human centered system.
And I absolutely agree with that.
But before things get to the court, including some things
that might go into the court
or into tribunals, you can imagine worlds
where you would actually have, uh, tested and respected
and treatable ai, um, uh, solution finding, um,
devices that would,
could be an awful lot cheaper than going into the court.
And could, could well just give people much more control
and agency over their own problems so
that they can sort things out in that space
before they get, uh, to the court.
Lots of issues with something like that.
But, but you can certainly see,
I would be very surprised if the technology didn't take us
there because people will choose to go there
'cause it would be cheaper, quicker, faster,
and they'll have more agency than if they
go through the court system.
I think your question went beyond that as well to, and it's,
and that, and I almost dunno where to begin on that one
because it, I think goes to how do we think about that, uh,
rule the law around housing?
How do we think about all
of the commercial dispute arrangements?
Uh, how do we even, I you go back far enough,
how do we ensure that our law is sound in credible?
You know, when when we think of
what our job is in the Ministry of the Justice,
how do we build trust in in the law?
How do we build people's trust in the,
you actually start right back at
how do we legislate in a way that is sensible
and accessible to people?
Because that, you know, to, to take your question out
to its wider circles, uh, it actually begins with the,
the settings of the law altogether,
and that people understand them
and that they're as intuitive and sensible
and accessible as possible.
And then I could talk for the next half hour about all
different ways you might approach that, but I won't.
Maybe another day patients of the, of the,
of the committee. Alright.
But I'm, I'm not sure we got quite the answers. Well,
It is a really hard question.
I, I get it. It's a philosophical question,
but that's what these briefings are about, stepping
as far back as you can
and saying, if we could design it differently,
how would we actually shrink the justice, shrink your job,
um, and do a better job elsewhere?
And who, who do we talk to about that? Mm-hmm. This, yeah.
Perhaps next question, it's question is, is probably
Posed there because I, I totally agree with his comments,
but I'm gonna go to on the board.
Ginny Anderson. Thank you. Um, I'm just interested in
Long-term insights, specifically
for Maori population in New Zealand.
And I'm interested to know, what does your modeling kind
of show for, uh, overrepresentation
of Maori within the justice system,
say over the next decade or so?
Uh, look, um, I might ask, uh, Victoria, Davey
to talk a little bit more on that.
We are actually about to publish a, um, some, uh,
little fact sheets on, um, the, uh, disproportional, uh,
consequence, uh, of the justice, uh, system on Wahine Maori.
Uh, and so we are doing a, a bit of work that is tracking it
through, uh, look, looking at exactly those, uh,
those challenges because they do have a very real impact on,
on the way the system functions.
But I might go straight to Victoria
and get you to just reflect on that question.
Thank you for your question.
Um, so as we know, um, the overrepresentation of Maori, uh,
within the criminal justice system
has been longstanding issue.
I think it was the late sort of nineties.
We had around 50% of Maori being incarcerated.
And, and it's been, uh, a really sticky figure.
We've not really been able
to make any significant progress on that.
What the forecast would suggest that, um, based on sort
of projected population growth, while the absolute numbers
of forecast to come have been dropping in terms of number
of people or number of Maori in the system, the proportion
of Maori, um, continues to remain the same.
And the projections would suggest that that will continue,
um, unless there are other systemic interventions.
Um, some of those sit without outside
of the criminal justice system
and are part of a, a broader, um, investment that is needed.
And we are seeing social investment agency
and others targeting focus groups like Wahine Maori, um,
and thinking about, uh, how we can tackle that issue early.
But in terms of the criminal justice systems, with the work
that we were doing, um, last year, which I talked briefly
to the committee about, uh, in December, is
focusing our efforts on what the levers are
for the criminal justice system in terms of, um,
reducing disproportionality
of Maori within the criminal justice system,
which is a change from just thinking about
improving outcomes for Maori.
It really focuses on what we can do.
Um, and so some of the work the team have been doing is
focusing on what the disproportionality looks like from
point of entry into the criminal justice system.
Um, and then at key decision points all the way
through into, uh, prison.
What we are hoping that work will do, um, in partnership
with the judiciary, uh, with corrections, with police,
will help us to really target our conversations
around those key decision points to understand
what is actually happening there
and what interventions,
meaningful interventions we may be able to,
uh, put in place.
They could be a manner, a number of things.
There could be practice changes.
They may, uh, signal potential policy changes.
Um, they may require, you know, external support.
Um, but I, I would say we we're on, on a journey
of uncovering and unpacking what some
of those key points are and where we think the investment
and impact, um, WW
where the investment will have
the greatest impact at the moment. Does,
Does that work include any direct work
with Iwi? I mean, you, you,
It does. Sorry, I was
remiss in saying in that grouping
that it is with Iwi as well.
So, uh, we have a number
of relationships across the country.
We work with National Iwi Chairs forum, uh, with Anaya.
There are other sort of groups such as the Taku Accord, uh,
group, and then partnerships specifically with Iwi
who are really wanting to proactively step into that space.
Uh, we already have the judiciary lead, um, program,
which is partnering with Iwi, uh,
and Maori providers within the region.
That, that support service is not just for Maori,
but it is culturally responsive for Maori, um,
supporting people coming into the courts to understand
and navigate the courts.
Um, and also to, uh, ensure
that the appropriate information is prepared
for judicial officers to make, um, uh, sound decisions
or informed decisions.
So, um, there is a lot of work focused on, um,
on Maori in particular.
And we, we've got a particular focus on reducing
that disproportionality first.
Thank you. I've just got one more question right on that.
Okay. That's, Maori women are
up 60%, and I've seen reports that it's one
of the highest potentially globally demographics in the
world for incarceration.
In your modeling and in, in the work you've,
you've explained, is there any, um, is there any view
or any work to look at the impact of intergenerational, uh,
offending and incarceration, particularly if you have women
who are mothers who are being separated from children,
and do you take that into account when looking at why
that overrepresentation continues to occur? Mm-hmm.
Yes. We're actually this month about to release, um,
a w Maori fact sheet, which talks about, um, the, uh,
journey of women through Maori women
through the criminal justice system,
and what that disproportionality looks like and the impact,
and that we speak to, um,
why this cohort is really priority cohort for us.
And it's because of that intergenerational impact.
Believe that this figures around 82% of women, uh,
parents are mothers, um, and they have children.
And we know that there is a, a correlation between, uh,
women coming into the criminal justice system.
It's a correlation between those coming into the criminal
justice system and who may have had interactions as youth.
Uh, but there's then also the on, uh,
the ongoing impact for the tamari.
So correction, both corrections
and, uh, ministry of Justice have that
as a priority cohort of focus.
And we have a targeted program.
Speak inextricably. Right.
I'm gonna get a Minister Walters,
and then I'm gonna go, uh, to Mr. O'Connor, Greg O'Connor.
Thank, and then we'll, um, open it up a bit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you for the, um, I'm a
Sucker for a good graph.
And on say, uh, I think it's 18,
you show the inflow in 2024,
the work into the various courts.
The massive slice of the donut is, uh,
district court criminal, that looks like it's kind
of almost over half.
Mm-hmm. And then we've also got the family court.
So I think that gives us a really clear sense of
where the capacity is going and where the backlogs might be.
Um, further to Duncan's question, we do have the alcohol
and drug court model where my rate of the data shows that
after a year, you have something like 86,
6% non recidivism rates compared to corrections,
which is three to 5%.
There's a drop off later, et cetera.
But there's a model that potentially works.
We have the family violence courts as well.
We have mechanisms like family court, uh, associates.
We have questions about whether we could expand the role
of jps and the district courts, for example, what sort
of thinking is being done there about
how we address the big slices of the donor.
So there again, the multiple, um, angles
that I'll hopefully try and, um, pick them up.
The first comment I I, I, I might make is actually, it's,
it's a bit opportunistic.
I, you, you noted that backlogs are increasing,
we're actually bringing backlogs down.
Uh, and it's been a really steady,
and I, I think quite impressive, um, progress.
We've brought 'em down 27%, uh, since their,
their peak at the same time as we are improving, uh,
timely access to justice, including in,
in the criminal court.
In fact, in particular in the, in the,
Uh, you then you identified a number of the different sorts
of things that we could be doing,
whether the alternative types of courts that there are,
which, uh, uh, um, if the committee was interested,
but we may not have time, uh, be perish, could talk further
to some of the evaluation work that we are doing, uh,
in that space.
Uh, the, the, the, the, one of the questions in the is
is that I think is actually really important to focus on,
is yes, we see some of those bespoke arrangements.
Uh, they, they will bring some advantage.
No, not in all cases, you know, so we are, we are quite, um,
we, we are working quite hard to evaluate, identify
where that gain is.
But at the same time, the more of those sorts
of courses you have, uh, uh,
those alternative arrangements you have,
the more complexity you bring to your overall system.
And, and that in turn has a, uh,
has an impact on understanding.
And, um, and how you step it through.
Part of is trying to bring, uh, the best of those
bespoke systems, uh, into the broader court.
So that in a way that is, to be honest, not quite
so expensive, uh, uh,
and is more, um, able to be, uh, universally offered
as opposed to the kind
of postcode justice which you can get when you do a a,
a small bespoke arrangement.
Uh, it's a, it's a way
of thinking about that across the board.
But there's a trade off there
because certainly the,
the most recent evaluative work we've done on the alcohol
drug courts is saying, we're getting an improvement in the
re-offending rates and the like,
and that term will flow through, uh, and,
and that, you know, lowers the demands on the courts.
Uh, next time you, next time you come round beyond that, uh,
we're absolutely looking at, um, the jurisdiction
of community magistrates committee will have had
some engagement in that.
Um, and, uh, the numbers of community, uh, magistrates, uh,
again, if, if you think over the last few years we've
brought in family court associates, uh, we have brought in,
we brought in associate coroners, uh, uh,
and we've increased the, um, uh, the, the jurisdiction
of community, or we are increasing the jurisdiction
of community magistrates.
Uh, again, there's a, one of the questions in the is is,
are we getting that right overall, you know,
'cause whilst those have all been good things,
they've all been sensible in a broad frame.
They have been a little bit, um, uh, designed
for the particular court at the particular time.
And part of the relatives questioning is, well,
if you step back, uh, is,
is the whole system kind of coherent?
How we bringing the same logic
and the same understanding into the different jurisdictions,
uh, of the, of the court, which is not to say you stop any
of those things, but it says, as you go forward,
we might wanna, uh, be a bit more disciplined in
how we bring some of the thinking and the,
and the, the principles of those different roles.
And that kind of goes to that question
around the overall structure, uh, of the,
of the court. Okay.
Um, Did you want
That? Yeah. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, good morning again,
thank you, um, for all the work that you've been doing, um,
with respect to this, um, subject matter, uh,
macro is very important and on your level.
Um, Mr. Kibble provides it's very macro level,
but I'm sure you'd, um, you'd agree that, uh,
micro is very important as well.
And so you spoke about, um, four areas that there's, um, bit
of, uh, looking forward accessibility, technology,
workforce, and trust.
And I wanna, um, uh, hone in on the workforce side of things
because I have been speaking to a number of people, um,
in the legal field.
And I've, I've asked them, you know, what would,
what would make, um, court timeliness better in your eyes?
And they mentioned a number of things,
but one of the things they said is that registry staff,
and this is where I get to the, to the micro, many
of them are really excellent, hardworking,
but also many of them, they feel these, um,
people in the legal field that when they're going
to the registry staff trying to get, um, documents,
information, they feel that sometimes the, the, the way
that things are done can make things very
difficult and drawn out.
And of course, that worsens, um, court timeliness.
And so on page 33, um,
you mentioned about some of the factors contributing
to delays are fundamental, um, responses are ongoing.
And I look at the table with respect to strategic choices.
Um, strategic choice six,
more actively shape the future workforce
of the court system, um,
and training administrative staff
to meet expecta, expectedly, not.
So, I guess in a nutshell, going to the micro, um,
what is being done with respect to, um,
training our staff at the
registries that are very hard working.
I used to be that once upon time when I was studying, um,
to, to have that on the forefront of their mind,
this access, um, this timeliness. Of course.
Yeah. Look, I, I'll, I cal reflect a little bit on,
on on this as well,
because most of on all of those staff, they, uh, report
through, uh, to Cal.
But first comment I would make is, as I,
I think we're very fortunate with, with the staff
that we have, they bring a tremendously
good attitude to the courts.
They're hardworking. We see how they perform in, you know,
the, the unseen story behind the, the terrible tragedy in,
um, Mount was
what the staff working in the coronial system were doing
over, over, over that period.
And it, it was a, it's traumatic and intense, uh, work.
Um, even in the, uh, court of appeal hearing, uh, last week
for the Christchurch, uh, terrorists, the work that,
the care that went around, uh, something like that.
And those are just the high profile things that,
that's happening, uh, all the time.
I, you've identified though, that some people engaging
with the courts find, uh,
this is me paraphrasing a little bit,
but, uh, you didn't use the word bureaucratic,
but that might have been implied,
but that people are struggling with the systems.
I think that is true. Uh,
I think fundamentally it's a consequence
of a very antiquated
and paper-based system that we are moving, uh, away from.
So those, yeah. Yeah. It's, it's can be a great frustration.
I'll, I'll, I'll sit with a contact center person just
to observe how they're doing their, their job for a time.
And at the moment, what they have to do is
that an inquiry comes in, uh, and
because, you know, the information
that the inquiry might need is,
is in a paper file somewhere, the contact person has to ring
around and try and find somebody who can access the person
who knows about that file and, and get to it.
It's incredibly inefficient, uh, system.
And I think the lawyers
and others who engage with the court will experience a
version of that.
So as we move into the digital transformation,
we've come in, a huge part of that is about
how we train our staff, how we equip them with tools
that will enable them to, uh,
get information much more, much more quickly.
Uh, and, and,
and to be honest, how we, how we hold onto them
for long enough that they can become, uh, experienced
to be doing work in our workforce at the moment,
to introduce a, a senior registrar, uh, role.
Uh, and that will get a better career structure.
So again, we will actually have more people that have, have,
uh, we hopefully get lower turnover
and we'll be able to reward people that are more experienced
and can actually help, uh, through that.
So there's always work to do in, in that space.
Um, uh, I, I am, I'm proud of the way my staff come
to work every day, but I know that we,
they don't always find it easy in the system
that they function anything current.
Just very reinforcing. I, the staff are fantastic.
It's, I, I, I, I acknowledge and recognize
and we do, it's probably one
of the hardest jobs in government with the types
of things they see here every day.
Um, because it's quite a difficult space, particularly
'cause there's people unhappy.
So, um, so acknowledging how great the staff are.
I think, as Andrew said, we surround them with process
that makes their life hard.
So whether that, whether that's a system process
or flow charts or bits
of paper float around all over the place.
So the modernization of the system
or the new case flow management will ensure, it means
that staff don't need to look for a bit of paper.
They'll just be able to look on a computer
and they'll find everything they need.
And it won't be just the staff,
it'll be the lawyers as well.
So that will be just transformational.
Hence why, how we think about delivering our services
in the future is the right thing to do now.
'cause we've got the enabler being the case flow management
system will allow us to do that.
So I'll give you an example.
If a, if, if you have a case in Wellington
and you've got a spare judge in Invercargill, we'll have
to email or scan
or courier the paper file to the judge in Incar
to hear the case with, we won't have to do that
because it'll just be on the system for the judge
to see including all the submissions,
however big they may or may not be.
So, um, the only other thing I'd say is that, uh, as part
of the future thing we need to be employing for a workforce
or the future, not the workforce today.
So as part of the insights briefing, it's about what, what,
what sort of staff member, what schools do they need in
three years time, rather than what do they need today?
'cause the system will have changed so much in three years
time that that's the type of
person we should be looking for.
Yeah. Nothing against the existing staff
and they will step up to the change.
Right. Very good question.
And no doubt it's gonna be a question we ask
you, uh, more regularly.
I've seen firsthand Cameron courts my area
as well, but Right.
Um, Mr. S gonna bring us home. The final question.
Yeah. Well, it sort of sums up, um, the whole,
we've talked about alternative resolutions
and you've talked about bespoke responses, um,
ones long term insights briefing.
Even the recent example of,
you're talking about a judge in Cargill being able
to preside over a case in, in Wellington.
Where does the bricks
and mortar fit in this, in your long term insights?
Do you see
or work being done
that actually every town won't have this courthouse sitting?
What is at the center of the, of the justice system
and the court system in that particular community?
Great, great question. I wonder if I might invite, um,
Kelvin and Victoria to swap, um, swap seats, uh, on,
on that, on this one.
Uh, so it's, it's actually, it's a really interesting, uh,
question, you know, is what, what role do the bricks
and mortar play?
What is the heart of a court?
You know, is it, is it the location?
Is it that, you know, there's certainly, um, uh, something
that, that offers to a community.
It's a physical manifestation of the rule
of law and of justice.
And I think there's clearly value in that.
Uh, but with technology, there are many,
many things you could do
that would mean people can get access to justice
so much more quickly than they previously could.
The future courts will have, I'm sure,
more remote participation.
The technology will get better.
A lot of the things that, that prevent us sometimes making
that work seamlessly.
We will sort out, the digital case management system will
open up a huge number of new possibilities.
I think that absolutely will change the trade offs
around bricks and mortar and virtual, uh, proceedings.
You will still have both.
Uh, but, but you, you know,
when when you fundamentally change the kind of the cost
and value proposition, you will end up, well,
I think some change overall exactly how that plays forward
and how we trade off all of the different things in relation
to, um, some of those slightly more abstract kind
of concepts of justice, where our physical presence is
important as opposed to the, the,
the physi the visible interaction,
which you might get in a remote space,
I think is about the journey over the next few years.
But if we're not talking about it,
we won't be de designing sufficient flexibility into
our new buildings and the like.
But I might get Kelvin to reflect a little further on that.
'cause he's thinking Yeah, property's part
of his empire in the ministry and thinking hard about it.
Thank you. Um, look, it is a good question
and we are continuing to build three
but new builds underway at the moment.
Those have all been designed with the future in mind.
Um, and so building flexibility into those courthouses, so
as needs change, as um, technology changes
and we, we adopt that we can adjust
how we use our courthouse spaces.
Um, there are some other things that we are starting
to think about more into the, the future that give us, uh,
more flexibility, more options.
So some of those are, when we think about remote
participation use of, of technology, uh, at the moment,
a judge and a registrar will sit in a big,
in a big courtroom and do a VL will actually in the future,
potentially we design some specific remote participation
courtrooms, which are actually much smaller.
Um, we're thinking about, uh, you know, how do we use, uh,
potentially community facilities.
So where it's not actually the Ministry of Justice having a,
a bricks and mortar building,
but we still in a physical presence partnering
with the local community in some way, um, to have, uh,
buildings that we use, uh, even, uh, some
of our thinkings going to, and this is,
this is very much a twinkle in the eye,
but, you know, what would a mobile court look like?
So a court that, um, we actually could move around from,
from small town to small towns.
So there are those sort of things to thinking about.
'cause we are conscious that, uh, just continuing
to invest in large, large courthouse buildings
as we have historically done, won't work as, um, the needs
and demographics and technology changes.
One, one thing I might just add to that is
that in this issue,
and in many of the other things we've talked about, uh, the,
the judiciary obviously have the constitutionally, um, uh,
uh, imperative role to play.
So when we think about buildings, you know, there's a,
there's obviously a discussion where the, the things
that we can bring the, the, the budget
that the government brings has to sit alongside
what the judicial preferences and, uh, discretions are.
So that's, that's part of this discussion.
Right. Hey, well that draws us nicely to a close thank you
for, uh, participation today.
Fantastic. Thank you.
And we are gonna continue with the same thing. Yep.
We appreciate your interest.
You say thank you.
Thank you.
Criminal is in the middle Asia.
Everyone's in Asia. We're just admiring
our own photos up on,
I was looking at them. Some of us
room. Yeah.
It wasn't me, it was my husband
that insisted that Lebanon's in.
Right. Hey, now we've got, um, half,
we've got half an hour with you too, I think.
I believe so, um, which is really good.
Little bit, maybe a little bit more, uh, but welcome
and, um, you, you know, the drill.
But, um, be nice to speak.
Uh, Maureen Okta, thank you Chair. Um, I am un jago.
I'm the assistant general and I'm here
with Madeleine Larisey, who's the deputy solicitor general
responsible for our criminal work.
Hence she's with me. Um,
because our Alta really focused on that aspect of
Casting forward 20 years, what is technology
and AI gonna do for criminal prosecutions,
for crown prosecutions?
And as you've just been talking with my colleagues from
Justice, it was a companion piece
focusing on the bit that we control.
And as solicitor general chief executive,
I also have the obligation to prepare, prepare an L tib.
So here we are. I hope you found our, um, work interesting.
It certainly, um, is challenging
to throw yourself out 20 years
and think what technology might bring.
Um, but we've given it a go,
so happy to discuss it with you.
Did you ask AI that question? And then we,
We knew you would ask that question,
but we did not ask AI that question. Yeah.
Okay. All right. Cool. Right now, no, no.
We get to ask questions now.
Yeah. Cool. Okay. We we're gotta start with Dr. Nan.
Is that right? You ready? Absolutely. Yes. Yes. I'm Dr.
Sunna. Okay.
Thank you so much for coming. Um, I've got two questions.
One related to technology
and one not sure, other one
that's not related to technology.
Mm-hmm. Um, one of the things we've noticed was
the fact that at this stage,
technology cannot replace cultural competence.
Mm-hmm. But we're seeing for, for example, in December
that diversity has been taken out of the, the
required consideration for judicial appointments, protocol,
um, that will have ongoing effect.
To give you, I guess a tangible example on page 11
of your report, you talked about the fact
that I think people, let me just double check.
Um, people are not, uh, accepting
what is it more people pleading late in the process,
which results in more hearings.
One of the works that Asian lawyers are currently working on
is very much
because Asian people tend to have a habit of not wanting
to plead or, or one not to settle
and want to go to a court hearing without a level of contr
cultural competency within the court system
or without the level that's now being downplayed.
What do you think would be the impact that it'll have for
that particular tricky issue that you're trying
to resolve when the judiciary system no longer
what doesn't promote the kind of cultural competency
that's needed for our communities
with the changing demographics of OT
or, um, that's my first question.
Uh, my second question around technology is
Well, let's do, let's do that.
Let's do maybe that question.
Let's do that one then we'll come back.
Sure. Yeah. I, I don't have the, um, guidelines
or the, uh, protocol
for judicial appointment in front of me.
But, but so somewhere in it, it makes the point
that judges need to be able to, um, reflect
and understand the society that it's serving.
And whether that's done by appointments
of a diverse range of people.
Whether that's done by judges understanding
where they don't have the competency that they need
and looking for, whether it be experts
or, um, interpreters or whatever.
They need to, you know,
to determine matters right
across the board that come for them.
But I think the key is understanding, having understanding
of the society they serve. Just
Supplementary on that. But
in saying that, you know, have we seen a number of cases
that has not been the case that judges know?
'cause sometimes you don't know what you don't know. Sure.
Judges have not sought out.
I guess the question then is, what is,
from a Crown law perspective, what is being done to ensure
that judges have that competency
or that access when they're making a ruling
or et cetera, is readily available?
Well, that, and it's not a medical Crown law,
judiciary determines its own, um, training programs.
They actually do have training programs
and cultural competency and specifically on, um,
some particular characteristics of Asian litigants in order
to understand the very point you're raising with me.
Mm-hmm. But we are participants
before we appear before the court.
So we don't participate in their
training programs. Fair enough.
Yeah. Um, the second question I have around technology,
which is what's your, what's the long term strategy,
I guess, around evidence integrity?
Mm. In the age where evidence our
no country's legislation is able to keep up with the rapid
changes to AI and et cetera.
So what is being done
or what is your consideration from that perspective?
But on the other side of it, you know, we've heard
before in terms of tarica,
as we're moving more towards from physical paper based
to electronic based, there's also a
difference in thinking of how we dispose
or how we ensure that evidence
or confidential documents are kept secure.
So I guess on both ends, um,
I'll be keen to hear your thoughts
On that. Yes. Well that,
I mean, you're landing right on a point that
is, is sort of worrying, um,
because we know that one of the, one of the things of AI is
that you might not be able to tell what
what you're seeing is the right thing.
Obviously the integrity
of the evidence in court is critical.
I'm gonna get Maddy to say a few words about that.
Um, and I think, I think I heard the Secretary
of Justice making a similar point.
We have to be, we don't know yet what we're gonna need
to make sure that the chain of evidence
or the integrity of the evidence is maintained,
but we know we're gonna have to watch for that.
So cautious adoption of AI is gonna have
to be the way without being too conservative
and missing out on all the promise that it might have.
So it's not a very helpful answer.
Sorry, because I think you are right on the point
that we need to watch for that.
'cause we can't embrace AI with, you know, too, um,
willingly without thinking about, well,
how do we maintain some of these things that are necessary
for a fair trial and
for the justices criminal justice system in particular
to be maintained as something people can have confidence in.
Yeah. Do You
have any further, oh, sorry. Do you wanna talk
Madeline uh, uh, only to confirm that questions of the,
uh, integrity of evidence, which really means in the context
of a criminal prosecution, the reliability of it, is it
what the crown or the defense say it is?
Mm-hmm. Is that really where it's come from?
Um, does it have the truth that the particular photo
or text, uh, purports to have?
Or, or is it fake?
These are, these create really, um,
tangible problems during trials.
And currently the, the tools we've got are the normal tools
of, of admissibility.
So for a, have, have we seen
Fake evidence from AI in courts to date,
Um, we have seen well, well
we have seen challenges by the defense
to crown evidence saying
that the crown can't adequately prove the integrity of it.
They can't, for instance, um, prove that the metadata
behind the thing, um, has itself got integrity.
So that's another layer of evidential, um, analysis that,
that might in the future need to be required.
And the court, uh, in the one case I'm familiar with on on
that went back to is there any basis in the evidence
to believe it's unreliable?
And what other evidence do we have that suggests
that this thing which is purporting
to be reliable is reliable.
So what other human evidence do we have that supports it?
Sure. But so that's the main example. So
Can I just run, so
ultimately who's responsible?
'cause not everyone has the capability
to determine whether something is AI generated
or, you know, we've had bills go through the house here.
But is there a, is does that lie with,
certainly with Crown prosecutions, that lies with you
to make sure that it is, and do you have the mechanisms
and the technologies to be able to prove that stuff isn't,
hasn't been AI generator
or do, um, you see my question, what I'm getting
At, I I do, I mean there are, in, in a standard case,
the disclosure process will provide enough evidence
as to the integrity
and provenance of particular pieces of evidence.
If the Crown knows in advance that the integrity
of a particular piece of evidence, um, on,
on a technological basis is gonna be put in issue,
then the Crown can get further, further evidence on that
and provide it either to the court or by way of disclosure.
Where the real challenge comes is
because defense don't have any duty of disclosure.
And that's, that's quite appropriate given the Crown has the
burden of proving the case.
The defense are in a position to produce evidence in
and as part of their case
that the Crown hasn't previously seen.
And it will be very difficult if it's a matter
of technological analysis for the Crown
to be able to respond.
And I did, I acknowledge that Tri tricky.
We should, but if you treated a challenge to police evidence
on AI grounds, it'll put like you do alibi defenses,
that is, you just gotta give notice
because you can't, uh, adequately respond to a,
you know, blanket allegation that it's fake.
That would go some way,
that would solve half of the problem, wouldn't
I think so, And we anticipate more likely need
for experts to give evidence about the metadata
or the underlying provenance of the thing.
So does that mean we need to change the
Law? Well, that was,
is that a job for the judges or, um,
Possibly the Ministry of Justice in its policy role?
Uh, we'll need to be thinking about do we need
to have notice requirements where the challenge is going
to be to, um, e either from the crown
to defense evidence or Yeah.
More commonly, um, the defense to crown
Evidence on a te can I just so s dying
to jump out
point on this topic. Yeah, I know, you're right.
It's, it's still on generative. Yeah.
And it feels like there might need
to be some investigation into the reliability of evidence.
I think there are also questions about the reliability of,
um, prosecutorial decision making.
And so I'm just curious about whether in any way, shape
or form there's guidance for the prosecutors on
what is acceptable in terms
of assisting making those decisions or not.
Hmm. Uh,
I, I don't, we don't currently have, um, guidance with
how you might use da, uh, sorry, um, technology
or AI to make decisions.
We, as you may have seen from the guidelines,
they anticipate that people,
the prosecutors are making those decisions.
They, we have to admit that there will come a time
where some of that, maybe some of that decision making
can be made more efficient by some analysis.
I suspect that, well,
I'm the solicit general till next Friday
general will always be anxious
that criminal prosecution decisions are being made
by a human because of the judgment and all the requirements
and all the balancing of
public interest that needs to go into it.
Maybe machines will be able to do
that in the future better than a few.
But it's a very way I want
to finish off this bit that, um,
Mine's right on that though. Yeah. It's really
Simple on this one or that one
On this, um, I, I just want from my brain, please.
Um, can you just give me an example like
where you think it would happen?
Like can you show, like in a, in a instance where a piece
of evidence, what would it be?
How, you know, like, I'm just trying to imagine how AI
would be utilized to generate something
that's gonna cause problems.
Can you, can you think of a scenario
where it could be now or in the future?
And what would that kind of look like?
Would it be a, a doc an official document? Would it be,
Well, I mean just,
you might have a better example sourced in reality,
but presumably it could be anything.
It could be an e it could look like an email
that has been sent could like,
it could look like a recording of a person
who makes an admission or makes a relevant Yeah.
Comment. But that might not be that. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. So it can come Yeah,
If you, but if you, you know,
we're talking about long term inside briefing, right?
I think that what we've been talking about today is
absolutely going to happen, right?
It's already happening. Yes. You even
as politicians and that problem.
So the, um, what would be useful, I think,
um, for you and I know
and acknowledge that you're leaving us,
but um, for the Crown law to think about, uh,
how it might deal with this
because it's only gonna become negligent, right?
Mm-hmm. And so to what extent we need
to either look at legislative change
around disclosure notice, whatever,
or what are the other options?
It might be a technology type stuff, right? I don't know.
You know, if you're looking at photos, I, no idea. Mm.
But, um, that is data I think is
probably something that's quite significant
coming outta this discussion
Today. And it might be legislative,
it might be guidance from
assist or to, or crown prosecutors
might be rules with the court.
So I think one of the things, one
of the great things I think about the, um,
crown prosecution network is
that there's an instant feedback loop.
Yeah. We, we, not policy agency,
we are an operational agency that manages this network,
but we can get instant feedback into policy processes about
what they're actually seeing on the ground.
So it might be combination of all those things that require,
So is that your role as crown law
or is that a, um, is that the question?
We should have been talking to Andrew about
The policy function isn't ours.
Um, but, but as you know, we work within the sector
and so we have that close relationship of being able
to source, whether it's from police or from prosecutors
or from corrections, whether on the ground issues are
arising that might need some policy attention.
And usually that policy attention
would come from the Ministry of Justice.
'cause I'm just thinking we might do a bit
of work on this, but I'm trying to work out
who the agency we should be talking to. But
Justice Criminal policy, the issue for you
is a Crown law
and Crown Prosecutor is increasingly, people are gonna say,
well, that met data is not supported
cast aspersions, you know?
Yeah. And then that becomes
increasingly gonna be in that game.
So you do, you have an operational Yes.
Consideration, but I take your point,
it's probably a question for the Ministry of Justice,
But there would be things happening no doubt in the UK
or in similar jurisdictions, whether, I mean,
it would just be interesting for us as a committee to know,
have there been instances of example, um, security footage
that was completely, you know, docked by AI
that ended up in courtroom and how did they respond?
Like that would be quite interesting. Yeah.
A briefing that does, does, I think there is a footnote
which mentions a couple of particular cases.
Are you able to expand on that a little
Bit for us? I'm sure we
can. Well, I, I dunno
That I can today, what I think as a committee we might,
um, separately from today,
but we might have a look at this is, uh, mm-hmm. So just a
Kind of quick comment on top of that,
because one of the things we're seeing is also
that in the long term insight briefing, they addresses a lot
of issues, but necessarily like,
do you have any thoughts on opportunity, on, on options of
how we can resolve some of those issues?
And I mentioned the list that you've put in in terms
of on page 11 around complexity of crown prosecutions
and we talked about technology.
So what's along the line of what everyone else is saying?
Is this something that you're proposing
that could potentially be a policy thing,
could be a legislative thing?
It would be good to know if
You could, this is your moment.
Yes, thank you. Um, you've only got three more days
About, about 80 by then.
Okay. But anyway, the, I think the, I think the point is,
I think the point that we are trying to raise here is
that we can see opportunities and we can see risk,
and we can't necessarily see what the solutions are
until we keep walking our way with our eyes open forward.
Because I, I think there's a risk
that you seize too quickly on say, let's legislate for this.
But that itself is a very true, true, true, you know, hard
to move around and option.
It might be a combination of guidance, as I've said,
and some maybe the evidence act,
maybe the rules report just as we go. Yeah.
But even as we kinda step into sort of a semi unknown,
there are still in, you think
that there's still a right balance of safeguards
as being put in place currently that
would mitigate any potential significant issue.
But is it a, like, we don't know if we don't know.
And I think to, uh, we don't know what we don't know, but,
and therefore we take a pretty cautious approach to
making sure our prosecutors understand what's happening,
what, you know, talking to 'em about it,
showing them this material so that they can think about, oh,
I need to just be careful or I need
to be more cautious in my firm about how we use
technology AI products.
I mean, just to bring it all back to Crown Law just
for a minute, uh, we are slowly
but cautiously adopting AI tools to help us in our work.
'cause of course we know that it can help us with efficiency
and productivity.
So we've got a, um, I can't remember the name of the policy.
We've got a policy, uh, can't remember the name, sorry,
of our policy that allows us now
to use a particular product,
but not with any material that is privileged, confidential,
you know, on our main system has to be publicly avail.
So we've got, we're starting to allow our people
to grow their ability to use these tools,
but in a way that's pretty cautious
and safe following the GCDs lead in government.
I just, that's just one tiny follow up question.
'cause one of the things that we, there's also concern when
comes to ai, et cetera, is when it comes to rights.
Mm-hmm. Um, and you thank you for, you know, in terms
of the confidential and sensitive Mm.
But I guess in terms of the procurement process of
what AI tools to use, you also do that level
of scrutiny in terms of where
that source data is going to be as well.
How That's right. And we are building our
own, our own systems.
Yeah. Amazing. Do you have, uh,
the chair offered me the opportunity of the answer.
Is there anything you want to say in about, you know,
what is the big answer here? Well,
Well, I, I, I can, um, repeat really, uh,
the solicitor general's point that
I think this was the point that it is probably premature now
to be anticipating what the law should like look,
look like in terms of how reliability, uh, of ai,
uh, evidence is tested.
But it is something we have to anticipate planning for.
What we are seeing is, um, value
of AI in processes that support decision making.
So, for instance, a huge volume of electronic evidence
that police gather in quite routine cases nowadays,
disclosure is, is an enormous challenge,
but AI is a helpful tool to s to sift that's right,
to sift and to, um, provide assurance to defense counsel
and the court that the terms defense counsel are interested
in, in terms of relevance across that great body of material
that might be taken from a phone.
The terms have been put in, the technology is reliable to,
to pull up material relating to those terms or parameters.
And therefore we have gathered together the
disposable relevant material.
So that's, uh, an area of AI use,
which has got huge potential as the technology gets better
and better and can be used across multiple systems.
'cause part of the problem for police,
not just in New Zealand, but in other jurisdictions, is that
there often aren't tools
that can search across all the different, uh, sort
of repositories from which evidence gets gathered.
So from, from cell phones, from, from, from computers, from
um, I don't know, from Snapchat, whatever.
But, you know, once, once it's all gathered, being able
to search across all of that, be satisfied
that you've drawn out the relevant material.
So there's, there's developments in that area,
which I promise is, is
There any concern or views around whether the tools
and the software and the model, you know, the, the,
the work done is New Zealand owned
and located in terms of cloud storage and,
and all of that, you know, access.
'cause a lot of the products we see now
that are available are, you know, Microsoft
or other, other examples that we have here in in Parliament.
Uh, does Crown Law have a view whether there needs
to be like a, you know, a New Zealand IP in terms of these,
these products that we would be using?
That's a really interesting question.
I expect the position of police generally on
that is the same for all government information.
So it probably that the answer at a,
at a high policy level sits with the G-D-D-O-O.
Mm-hmm. In terms of the way police currently do it.
Um, because they're, they're responsible for holding the,
the repository of evidence and attending to the disclosure.
It's not a crown function.
Um, they primarily use their own system,
is my understanding, called IMT,
which they have created themselves and hold internally
and tries to pull all the evidence
that police hold on a particular file together.
And within that it can be reliably searched.
But, um, that I think there are limitations on, on
how effective IMT is for the challenges of the future.
Right now I'm going to ms,
Oh, well it was going to be supplementary,
but, um, uh, thank you.
I think you've, essentially, the question was gonna be
how do you feel AI can, um, the good components of ai,
but you were, you were explaining
that just there in your question, so thank you.
Um, and thank you solicitor general
for 10 years of, um, of service.
Oh, thank you very much. That's, that was my opinion too.
Okay. Right. Any other questions from anyone?
Can I ask a non-AI one? Yeah.
Sorry That we went, but that was fascinating.
Um, so am I correct that, uh, the briefing also shows
that the proportion of crown prosecutions has gone up
compared to agency prosecutions?
I'm just curious about whether what the analysis is
around there, whether it's an increase of maximum penalties
or maybe overcharging or Yeah.
Where that might lie.
I think a part that's, that we're
seeing more serious vending.
So, um, in my understanding,
sorry it's a bit anecdotal,
but, um, in each region
of the country over the last 18 months, the number
of homicides has just gone up hugely.
Mm-hmm. And, um,
And that's, that's certainly, um, backed up
by the Ministry of Justice data on serious crime.
Um,
But generally crimes rise.
Yeah. The MR made the same comment that, uh, uh, fewer
but more complex cases, I think he
Said That's right.
What is, and we didn't push face. What does that mean?
And yeah, obviously homicides is one,
but, uh, what, why are they more complex?
Organized crime? Yeah. Um, being multiple
Defendants organized crime.
Yeah. Multiple charges, um, conspiracies charged,
um, along with individual individualized defending.
Um, as soon as you've got a multi-defendant trial,
you've got pretrial applications being brought by each
of those individuals appeals being brought.
So it looks like one case. Yeah, but
It's not. That's right. Right.
We're gonna close that. Oh, sorry.
Do you want mine you go,
Since we're on this subject. Yeah,
I know. And since we've had someone 10 years in the
job, um, the very serious subject of our babies being killed
by carers, by parents, by people at the home, um,
from your experience
and, you know, they seem to circumvent guilt, um, uh,
by saying, by relying on the right to silence.
Any thoughts about that as an outgoing solicitor
General? Yeah. And
I know there's a report just last week,
I think on recent times, um, about are we getting any better
as a society with stopping, hurting and killing our kids?
Um, so it was a very serious societal matter.
Um, I'd be slow to say that some of those core principles
of our criminal justice system should,
should readily be just done away with.
'cause they do perform an important function of course.
So the right to silence, the right to stand trial,
all these things, they're important.
Sometimes it's hard to see
that when there's this other societal harm happening.
So maybe that's a discussion that's,
that feels like an an out answer for me.
But I feel like there needs to be a discussion about
what does that look like in our society?
'cause we also need to maintain a criminal justice system
that everybody can trust.
Is d difficult, um, going to comparison?
Alright, well look, well, was yours a news item?
So the UK a quite some time ago, reformed its law
to not require evidence to be given,
but to have a jury direction.
Is, am I right about that? A jury direction
that the jury can infer, um,
from the silence what it was to
They, they can, um, in some cases.
So where, where silence
is based on other evidence consistent
with guilt in the sense that it's a situation where
on any reasonable analysis, the person would be expected
to be able to say something
and instead they've said in their police
interview, no, I know nothing.
So they're in the room when a child's killed
and they choose not to say anything.
So it's either them or the other person,
which is one of the cases we've got. Right?
Yeah. Um, that would be, could be used there.
And it's not silence at trial so much
as silence at the time they were interviewed.
So in circumstances where the police are talking
to them about you were there, you were in the room
and you're saying you've got nothing to say
and you didn't see anything, then a judge can say
to the jury, you know, you will be able to think about that
as part of the other evidence is,
Is there, is there, does it work or is it a bad idea?
It creates appeal points. It creates what? Appeal
Points. Uh,
It's not a bad thing though.
Um, I've just, I don't think that is a patent flaw. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay.
But I'd be curious as to whether it, there's, that's
A Good example if I may say of, of the
question I was trying to answer
before about you would just throw out one thing for another,
you would find, you would look for some sort of measure.
You know, where was the science? Where were you at the time?
Can you infer, can a jury infer from that?
So very carefully digging into that,
The Australians have gone a step, haven't they?
The who? The Australians?
Uh, I'm not familiar with it.
Yeah, they have, I have a
member's bill on this, by the way.
Ah, okay. So I am very keen to You've got it all over us.
Engage on that. Right. On that basis, I think.
And look, I just wanna thank you solicit general
for your wonderful years of services. 10 years, the decade,
10 years this week.
Yes.
And stay. So thank you
for your wonderful service over those years.
And do we know who's replacing it? We do not. We do not.
The process is underway, run
by the Public Service commission
and re reporting to the attorney general.
So we have nothing to do with that process.
All right. Um, cool. But, um,
hey, thank you for coming both.
Thanks for much all of you this morning, but thank you.
It's been very helpful. It's been
a great discussion actually. Yeah.
Thank you for your interest in our Work.
Okay.
Our members, I'm gonna suggest we take
wasn't no problem, we're back sort of eight,
can we say 10 past?
Alright. Thank
Jacinta. So
sorry for these sort of long term in inside briefings,
there are no like post hearing
questions, anything like that.
Do you want him to post? Uh, no.
Um, can I just say before we get Jacinta in?
No, let's start, start with be five minutes.
I, I couldn't find this, um,
petition on the agenda on the tool.
It's there now. I went here to It's there now.
Yeah, but how can I prepare? Yeah. You know, if it's
Not on the tool, I'm very sorry.
And actually it's for both them. Yeah.
I had a challenge last night. Kim. Fine.
Have we got her here or she got,
I mentioned I mentioned this morning.
Do you want sit Daniel? Do you wanna move
to the other lady there for a second?
We've got Sam Cross after this, haven't we? Yeah.
Cool. Must need one on the other side.
Now why are we doing, you guys, are we prepared
to real go at that inconsistency?
I think we should have a go at. Yeah. What inconsistency?
The Supreme Court. Oh yeah.
You guys can, rather than just write a
report Oh yeah, yeah, too.
I think we should be quite trying to be bit more Yeah.
Give some direction as to how it should be fixed.
Yeah, I think so.
We can't do is this committee, I don't think. Yeah.
Otherwise what we'll do is disappear into the bows of some
try and get,
Get coffee delivered itself.
Is it quite busy? Yeah.
And we were waiting and then, but Jamie asked
Them to top it down us, so they going Oh,
Nice. We didn't want to
cause trouble with the committee.
So moving to Sam Trth. Yeah. Cool. Thank you.
I'll just grab one of these. Always wanted to try these.
Yeah. Mr.
Trth, Andrew Bailey from the, um, select committee.
Um, we've got 10 minutes with,
do you think we're coming slightly earlier?
Um, your floor is yours.
Um, Uh, Kia. Good morning everybody.
My name is, uh, Sam Trough.
I'm the founder and director of the Road to Healing Ro.
Um, what the Road to Healing RO is is a, um,
grassroots startup organization, um,
where we raise awareness around sexual violence, um,
and encourage others to speak up,
offer peer support free via, um,
my platforms online, Facebook and Instagram.
And also we have started running petitions
to create law reform.
Um, which brings me to the reason why I'm here today.
Um, uh, the petition for minimum mandatory sentences
for sexual offenders.
Um, I just wanna start with some of our latest statistics
around sexual violence in New Zealand.
Um, and I'm sure you may or may not be aware of them.
Um, so a study from the Helen Clark Foundation recently
presented to parliament found
that over 209,000 New Zealanders experience some
form of sexual violence within a 12 month period.
Um, when we reverse those numbers, that works out
to be one person every three minutes.
The latest Lancet study out of Australia earlier last year,
around July, August,
put us at a higher youth victim rate
for sexual violence than the US and the uk.
We have a current statistic of one in three girls by the age
of 18 experiencing sexual violence
and one in five boys by the age
of 18 experiencing sexual violence.
Sexual violence is the leading cause in addiction.
Um, other social issues including, um, incarceration.
Over 60% of our prison population, male prison population
have been sexually abused.
Over 80% of our female
prison population have been sexually abused.
Um, when we look at suicide, someone
who has been sexually abused is 10 times more likely
to take their own life.
I can go on and on or mourning about stats,
but we have a very short period of time.
But I just thought I'd share those with you, um, for you
to get a better understanding of
where sexual violence is at in New Zealand.
And the reason why I'm so passionate about it is
because I'm a survivor of sexual violence myself.
Um, I spent 15 years in addiction.
I was sentenced to six different terms
of imprisonment in my teenage and early twenties.
Um, I've suffered anxiety, depression,
um, I've survived suicide attempts.
I've been through the ringer.
And, um, and I'm just very fortunate that I have a loving
and, and supporting family, um,
and beautiful children that have made me put
through and stay here.
Um, so why this petition?
Um, I've walked, I've walked the country in 2022.
I walked from Bluff to Cape bga, uh, 2023.
I walked from Mount Hikurangi on the east coast
of the North island to Mount Taranaki on the west coast.
In 2024, we cycled 2000 kilometers
around the south island south.
And last year we walked from Cape to the beehive
with this particular petition.
And when I'm doing these, these walks, these events,
I'm constantly connecting with people in real life
and also on my social media platform.
Um, receiving upwards of 10,
15 messages per day when I'm doing these events.
And almost every single person I stop
and speak to says, me too
or my sister, my brother, my cousin, et cetera, et cetera.
So everyone knows the problem is real.
And one of the things that really sticks out when I talk
to survivors is the lack
of justice within the court process.
The sentences don't reflect the pain, the trauma,
the anguish that they go through.
Some of these, some of these survivors are raped
by family members and then watch these people get
two years prison, sometimes home detention.
Um, and it's just, it just doesn't, it doesn't add up.
When we see people getting multiple years for fraud
and people getting 12 months home detention, you, you know,
teenagers getting 12 months home detention
for multiple counts of rape.
It's, it's just, it's, it's absurd.
The core issue with it is, is the inconsistent outcomes.
We can have one case in one courtroom at one end
of the country where a a a reasonable sentence will be,
will be handed down of, of five
or six years for a, a charge of rape.
And then we can go to the other end of the country.
Very, very similar case.
And that person may get 18 months home detention, um,
for mitigating factors
and character references and things like that.
Guilty pleas, you know, the impact of sexual violence
isn't reflected in these sentences.
When a child, a vulnerable, innocent child
is taken advantage of and abused in the most evil
and sadistic way, they carry that for life.
They carry that for life.
I might be speaking clearly and consistently now,
but I'll tell you right now, my heart is,
is pounding in my chest just because I'm speaking about this
and I speak about this stuff all the time, um, the effects
that it has on people.
I constantly get messages.
I constantly talk to survivors
and the issues, the ongoing issues
that they face on a day-to-day basis is
absolutely heart wrenching.
And then to hear their, um, their story of, of what happened
to their perpetrator, what they went through
through the court system, um, how they were re-traumatized
through that whole process, um, cross-examined
and made out to be a liar by the defense lawyer.
All of that, all of that re-traumatization to then come away
with a, a a two year
or a three year prison sentence when
that person will be walking the streets in 12 months
and they've barely gotten grips on what's going on for them.
Um, you know, obviously the, the impact, the impact
of being sexually abused, um, it's lifelong.
It's ongoing. It, it does not stop.
It, it, it seeps into every single aspect
of a survivor or victim's life.
Um, our work, our relationships, the way we parent.
Um, a I've spoken to, um, many facilitators in drug
and alcohol programs,
and one in particular I always go back to is a lady
who worked at Higher Ground for 12 years
as a senior facilitator
and now runs her own charity for recovery.
Um, she said that over 90%, so that's nine.
So one in 10 haven't been sexually abused.
She said it's constant in the sharing circles that she sees.
It is a constant, it's, it's, it's, it's almost a given is
that these addicts that are in there for methamphetamine,
alcohol, whatever the, the substance may be,
their underlining trauma always, almost always relates back
to sexual violence, criminal behavior.
Um, you know, as you guys would know,
being the Justice Committee, um,
you would probably hear it quite a lot.
You know, I mean, I can only speak to my own personal self
and the statistics that I just shared earlier
around incarceration,
but I had a good family other than what happened to me.
I had a good, we weren't rich,
we weren't poor though we were just a typical
normal Kiwi family.
And, um, and I had older siblings and stuff and, and, um,
and my older siblings have gone on to do amazing things,
run multimillion dollar businesses.
My father runs a multimillion dollar company.
Um, I spent all of my youth in, in, in family youth jail or,
or, um, children and young persons care or, or tamari care.
And then, um, all of my late teens
and early twenties in prison,
because I was an angry, confused, um, broken,
broken little boy.
And when I look at the youth crime that's going on now,
I can almost, I would,
I would happily bet everything I own on the fact
that at least 70 or 80%
of those kids committing these crimes have been exposed
to adverse childhood experiences like sexual violence.
Um, it's also
prevalent in our gang uh, culture.
Um, and that was, that was, um, that was proven, um,
through the Royal Commission of Inquiry into faith
and state based care, um, that, you know, almost,
you know, that, that basically the sexual violence created
this culture of gangs
and created these, these angry men trying to put on masks
to, um, to hide the shame
and the pain that they're going through.
Um, domestic violence.
Um, it, it, it's a precursor into domestic violence.
And I, and I can say that, um, from personal experience
and also, um, from the space
that I've held in multiple different,
with multiple different organizations
and multiple different men's circles, um, that
survivors of sexual violence, male survivors
of sexual violence often tend to, um, go down a path
of domestic violence and, and,
and hurt, basically hurt the people
that are trying to love them.
Okay? So what this petition is seeking
and why it matters is, um,
and why I, why I set it at eight years is
because there's no opportunity for anybody
to heal when there's a, a short sentence of imprisonment
or a, or a sentence of home detention.
There's no opportunity to heal, not for the victim.
And in my personal opinion, I don't believe
that there's much hope for the perpetrators to heal,
but we've gotta hold onto that hope.
So my, my thought process behind an eight year minimum
mandatory prison sentence, um, is the following.
It would act as a, as a serious deterrent for anyone
that's having thoughts about acting out
and, um, you know, acting on these impulses and thoughts
and feelings that they're having towards children.
It would, it would give the government
or the system the opportunity to have
that offender in the same place for a long period of time so
that they could get the appropriate care that they require
to release them back into the community.
So programs, um, psychological
and psychiatric care, um, all
of those things could all be undertaken within
the walls of the prison.
And, um, and, and we could, we could hope that at the end of
that, um, they would be released with the best chance
of not re-offending.
Um, it's an accurate reflection on the pain
and trauma that it inflicts on the victim or the survivor.
Um, you know, when you go through what you go through
and you've gotta carry it for the rest of your life,
and you think that someone only has to stay at home
for 12 months, or they have to go
and be uncomfortable for nine months
of a three year sentence, or a two
and a half year sentence in prison.
It's just, it just does not make sense.
Um, the other thing is, is that with the way,
I I personally believe that with the way things are going,
our statistics are getting worse.
Um, and they're only gonna continue to get worse.
We need to put protecting children at the forefront
of every single decision we make as a country.
Nothing else matters.
If our children are being abused, neglected,
and all of the rest of it, nothing else matters
because our children are the future.
You know, this, these, these victims, they're not,
they're not nameless.
They're not faceless.
They're either people's daughters, people's sons, and, um,
and people are, people are, um,
are really hurting out there.
It's, it's, it's so common.
Um, I share media articles, um, I do recaps.
So everything I see that comes through on my Facebook feed,
I will share those articles about sexual offending.
And I do a recap every seven to 10 days.
And there's always at least
two articles every day about sexual violence.
It is, it is at an epidemic rate.
Your daughter, if you have a daughter, she is more likely
to be sexually violated by the age
of 18 than any other thing.
You know, the likelihood
of someone being permanently injured in a vehicle accident
in New Zealand is about one in 1500.
And we spend millions
of dollars a year on road safety campaigns,
and we, we spend millions of dollars on police resources
trying to keep our roads safe.
Sam, Sam, I'm gonna have to, um,
because we're well over time,
but look, I think, um, you've made a very strong case
and thank you for sharing your personal insights.
Um, that's always difficult to do and that, uh,
but actually makes it much more poignant.
Look, um, we've seen your petition, um,
and, uh, note, note the importance of it.
I think everyone in parliament is very aware of this issue,
uh, and, you know,
increasingly it's becoming to the forefront.
So I think that's very, very helpful, um,
discussion this morning
that you've presented us with your petition.
Thank you. I appreciate your guys' time and, um,
and the work that you guys do.
I hope that it can move forward and, um,
and we can create some, some much needed law reform.
Cool. Uh, what was that, Raymond? Uh,
Sorry, Mr. Chair.
Um,
'cause we haven't got time for questions, can we,
are you okay with us emailing you with our questions, Stan?
Absolutely. Yes. Do do. So please, yes.
Don't, don't do it publicly.
What we'll do is we'll find that out.
Um, we'll get the officials to get your email address.
For some people may be, is this private or public?
Public it. Public, yeah, public.
So don't, don't say your email,
but we will, um, send you some questions.
Hey, thank you very much Sam,
and I really appreciate your time this morning.
No, likewise. Thank you very much.
Have a nice day. Thank you.
Thank you. Cheer for that. Thank you Byebye.
Goodbye. Right now. Uh, Ms.
McGregor.
Hello? Yeah, hey, sorry.
We, um, we were a little bit slow
and, um, I'm glad you've come back on board.
We, uh, tried to get hold of you,
but we couldn't get hold of you.
So we moved on.
That's okay. I can see my video's not quite working there.
I'm not sure what's happening there. Sorry.
Alright. But we can hear you clearly.
That's a, so we've got 10 minutes. We've got 10 minutes.
Okay. So first of all, um, thank you for the opportunity
to speak here today.
My name's Jacinta McGregor
and I'm the petitioner calling for reform of bail
and sentencing laws for sex offenders in New Zealand.
Uh, approximately 82,000 adults are sexually
assaulted each year.
In 2024 alone, this equated
to an estimated 217,000 sexual
assault offenses.
One in three people experience sexual
assault over a lifetime.
Now, it's important to note
that those figures don't actually include children under the
age of 15, which means that that doesn't
represent all victims of sexual offending in New Zealand.
So around one in five boys
and around one in three girls experience sexual abuse
before the age of 16.
When you look at adult
and child victimization data together, the true scale
of sexual harm in New Zealand is then clear.
We also know that less than 10%
of sexual assault is reported to police.
That means that over 90% of sexual offenses go unreported.
This has serious implications.
Uh, when bail decisions heavily re rely on,
uh, prior convictions.
We must recognize that a lack of conviction history
does not necessarily mean a lack of offending history.
Given the extremely low reporting rate,
courts may be assessing risk using incomplete information.
We are only seeing the tip of the iceberg.
Currently, more than 80% of sexual abusers who plead guilty
are granted bail while awaiting sentencing.
80%. Then add to that a lack of bail conditions
to protect victims and our communities victims,
including children, can
and do encounter their abuser in everyday public places
while they're out on bail in their local community.
And this includes pedophiles, guilty pedophiles.
This is not a theoretical risk. It is happening now.
And let's not forget we are talking about
guilty sex offenders.
A recent case, uh, involved a convicted sex offender
who was granted permission to leave the country
and it go overseas on holiday.
Due to stress. Cases like this raise legitimate concerns
and show just how badly a reform is needed.
Once an offender has admitted guilt, victim safety,
community protection and justice should be our priority.
Instead, it's the victims that are forced
to alter their lives, changing their routines,
becoming prisoners in their own homes, while the offender
continues on with their everyday life.
For many victims, this is not justice.
It's re-traumatizing, insulting,
and quite frankly, puts our communities at unnecessary risk.
Another core concern is the use
of subjective sentencing discounts, particularly
for good character and showing remorse.
Victims consistently report
that hearing their abuser receive a reduced sentence
for contradictory reasons, like being a good person
or showing remorse is deeply harmful.
Remorse is so easy to perform if it means
that they'll get less time and good character often
coexist with abuse.
These discounts may make sense in some other areas
of criminal law, but for sexual offending,
they frequently undermine confidence in the justice system
and they add to the torment that these victims are facing
every single day.
Bail conditions and sentencing should reflect the serious
and lasting impact of these crimes.
The data provided by Ministry of Justice shows at least 80%
of guilty sex offenders are granted bail,
and a significant number are either not placed on the sex
offenders register, or are discharged
without any conviction.
These trends are showing leniency, not increased safety.
At the same time, as I mentioned
before, we know sexual offending in New Zealand is
significantly under-reported,
which makes these numbers even more troubling.
The sad reality is, is that any wonder that any,
that less than 10% of sexual offenses get reported,
victims are seeing offenders remaining free,
unmonitored effectively unrestricted,
and it sends a clear message
that speaking up may not protect you.
That is not a message that we should accept.
Some of the reasons mentioned in the New Zealand Crime
and Victims Survey for victims not reporting these crimes,
um, is a belief that nothing could, would be done,
and fear of retaliation.
If our bail and sentencing rules were
sufficient, this wouldn't be the case.
So what am I asking for?
I am requesting stronger bail conditions after guilty pleas
and sentencing to reflect the crime.
Mandatory monitoring such
as GPS exclusion zones when bail is granted, for example,
no access around the community of the victims, no access
around children for pedophiles, including playgrounds,
beaches, the list goes on.
Um, and certainly no overseas holidays, uh,
which obviously increases a flight risk before sentencing.
I'm requesting the removal
of subjective sentencing discounts good
character and showing remorse.
Mandatory exclusion, uh,
inclusion on the sex offenders register
for all convicted sex offenders,
except in truly exceptional circumstances.
Um, for example, a consensual relationship of minors
and a review for the growing use
of discharges without conviction in sexual offending cases.
These should be almost unheard of for guilty sex offenders.
These changes would not remove discretion entirely,
but they would rebalance the system towards safety,
accountability and start building back some trust.
Sexual offending already takes enough from victims.
The justice system should not take the rest.
I'm asking this committee to consider reforms
that prioritize victim protection,
restore public confidence,
and reflect the seriousness
of sexual offending in New Zealand.
I I thank you for listening and I welcome any questions.
Hey, well, thank you very much.
Can I just ask the first question?
You talked about increasing use
of discharges without conviction.
Sure. What, what, what is that? What's that issue?
Well, these are guilty sex offenders who have pled guilty
and for whatever reason, there's been examples where,
because of their status, um,
they have been discharged without conviction.
So the issue for me is they have admitted guilt
and they're not receiving any. Um,
And can you comment on why?
What was, what's the rationale on those circumstances?
I don't wanna know particular cases,
but why, why that's occurring if they,
um, acknowledged.
I only know the stats, which obviously don't have the,
the full information in front of me.
The personal information that I do know, the case
that I am aware of is a person who was high up in, um,
military and it would affect their, um, future.
Wow. Okay. Right. Um, any other questions for members?
Look, hey, um, Ms.
Mcg McGregor, thank you very much for a very, um,
thoughtful and clear, uh, petition.
Uh, we've obviously been, uh, talking to Mr.
Uh, Sam tr that I know so
and so a lot of the points are comments,
but, um, both submissions have been very powerful
and I thank you this morning for taking the time to join us.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Bye-bye.
Right.